# JavaScript Summary

Brief JS basics

<details>
  <summary>JS definition</summary>
  
Javascript is a high-level single-threaded garbage-collected interpreted or just-in-time compiled prototype-based multi-paradigm dynamic language with a non-blocking event loop.
</details>

## 1. Data and Structure types

[MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Data_structures#Data_and_Structure_types)

The latest ECMAScript standard defines **nine** types, of which first seven is primitives:

1. Undefined
2. Boolean
3. String
4. Number
5. BigInt
6. Symbol
7. Null (special primitive, typeof 'object')
8. **Object** is a special structural type for any constructed object instance: new Object, new Array, new Map, new Set, new WeakMap, new WeakSet, new Date and almost everything made with **new** keyword.
9. **Function** (every Function constructor is derived from Object constructor).

<details>
  <summary>1.1 Null and Undefined difference</summary>
  
- **Null** means an empty value. It has to be assigned and explicitly means nothing.
- **Undefined** means a variable has been declared, but the value of that variable has not yet been defined.
</details>

## 2. What is a Function?
A **function** is a process which takes some input (arguments) and produces some output (a return value).
Functions may serve the following purposes:
- mapping: produce some output based on given inputs. A function maps input values to output values.
- procedures: a function may be called to perform a sequence of steps.
- I/O: some functions exist to communicate with other parts of the system, such as the screen, storage, system logs, or network.

In functions, the `this` keyword refers to the the object that the function belongs to.

<details>
  <summary>2.1. Pure and Impure functions</summary>
  
Pure functions:
- must take arguments
- the same input (arguments) will always produce the same output (return)
- rely only on local state and do not mutate external state (note: console.log changes global state)
- do not produce side effects
- cannot call impure functions

An impure function mutates state outside its scope. Any function that has side effects is impure.
</details>

<details>
  <summary>2.2. Closures</summary>

[MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Closures)

A **closure** is the combination of a function bundled together (enclosed) with references to its surrounding state (the lexical environment).
With closures we have access to an outer function’s scope from an inner function.
In JavaScript, closures are created every time a function is created, at function creation time.
</details>

<details>
  <summary>2.3. Higher-order Functions</summary>
  
A higher-order function is a function that:
- accepts another function as an argument, or
- returns a function as a result.

In JavaScript, functions are first-class objects. They can be stored and passed around as values: we can assign a function to a variable or pass a function to another function.
</details>

<details>
  <summary>2.4. IIFE</summary>
  
[MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/IIFE)

An Immediately Invoked Function Expression is a function that runs as soon as it is defined.
`(function () { /* ... */ })()`
 - The anonymous function with lexical scope enclosed within the Grouping Operator `()` prevents accessing variables within the IIFE as well as polluting the global scope.
 - The second `()` operator creates the IIFE through which the JavaScript engine will directly interpret the function.

 Examples:
  - `(x => x)('123')` // returns '123'
</details>

<details>
  <summary>2.5. Differences between .call and .apply</summary>
  
[js.info](https://javascript.info/call-apply-decorators)

This methods give an opportunity to change the object to which the `this` keyword refers.
They both invoke the function they are called on.

The difference is that `.call` passes all arguments after the first one on to the invoked function, while `.apply` takes an array as its second argument and passes the members of that array as arguments.
</details>

## 3. Let, Const, Var
There are two main differences of var compared to let/const:
- **var** variables have no block scope, they are visible minimum at the function level.
- **var** declarations are processed at function start (script start for globals).

These differences make **var** worse than **let** most of the time. Block-level variables is much easier to understand.

To declare a constant (unchanging) variable, use **const** instead of **let**.

<details>
  <summary>3.1. Hoisting</summary>
  
**Hoisting** means that variable and function declarations are put into memory during the compile phase, so during execution phase they are already reachable.

Variable assignments are not hoisted.
</details>

## 4. The Event interface
It represents an event which takes place in the DOM. An event can be triggered by the user action, programmatically, or generated by APIs.

DOM elements can be set up as "event listeners" and execute code in response to handle them.

<details>
  <summary>4.1. DOM</summary>
  
[js.info](https://javascript.info/bubbling-and-capturing)

The Document Object Model (**DOM**) connects web pages to scripts or programming languages by representing the structure of a document in memory.

The DOM represents a document with a logical tree. Each branch of the tree ends in a **node**, and each node contains objects. DOM methods allow programmatic access to the tree. With them, you can change the document's structure, style, or content.

Nodes can also have event handlers attached to them. Once an event is triggered, the event handlers get executed.
</details>

<details>
  <summary>4.2. Bubbling and capturing</summary>
  
[js.info](https://javascript.info/bubbling-and-capturing)

The bubbling principle - when an event happens on an element, it first runs the handlers on it, then on its parent, then all the way up on other ancestors.

The process is called “bubbling”, because events “bubble” from the inner element up through parents like a bubble in the water.
</details>

<details>
  <summary>4.3. Event delegation</summary>
  
[js.info](https://javascript.info/event-delegation)

The idea is that if we have a lot of elements handled in a similar way, then instead of assigning a handler to each of them – we put a single handler on their common ancestor.

</details>

## 5. Мар and WeakMap objects
[MDN - Map](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Map)

**Map** is a collection of keyed data items, just like an Object. But the main difference is that Map allows keys of any type. Unlike objects, keys are not converted to strings.

[MDN - WeakMap](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/WeakMap)

**WeakMap** is Map-like collection that allows only objects as keys and removes them together with associated value once they become inaccessible by other means. If we’re working with an object that “belongs” to another code or 3rd-party library, and would like to store some data associated with it, that should only exist while the object is alive – then WeakMap is exactly what’s needed.
We put the data to a WeakMap, using the object as the key, and when the object is garbage collected, that data will automatically disappear as well.

Summary:
- WeakMap doesn’t prevent garbage-collection of key objects.
- WeakMap keys must be objects, not primitives.

## 6. Set and WeakSet objects
[MDN-Set](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Set)

The **Set** object stores unique values of any type, whether primitive values or object references.

[MDN-WeakSet](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/WeakSet)

The **WeakSet** is Set-like collection that stores only objects and removes them once they become inaccessible by other means.

- Only objects can be added to WeakSet (not primitives).
- an object exists in the set while it is reachable from somewhere else.
- like Set, it supports add, has and delete, but not size, keys and no iterations.

The most notable limitation of WeakMap/WeakSet is the absence of iterations, and inability to get all current content. That may appear inconvenient, but does not prevent WeakMap/WeakSet from doing their main job – be an “additional” storage of data for objects which are stored/managed at another place.
WeakMap/WeakSet are used as “secondary” data structures in addition to the “main” object storage. Once the object is removed from the main storage, if it is only found as the key of WeakMap/WeakSet, it will be cleaned up automatically.

## 7. Symbol
[js.info](https://javascript.info/symbol)

Is a primitive type for unique identifiers. They are created with **Symbol()** call with an optional description (name).

 - can be passed to an object as it key. By specification object property keys may be either of string type, or of symbol type only.
 - guaranteed to be unique. Even if we create many symbols with the same description, they are different values. The description is just a label that doesn’t affect anything.
 - allow us to create “hidden” properties of an object, that no other part of code can accidentally access or overwrite.

 If object belongs to 3-rd party code, and that code also works with it, that is unsafe to add any fields to it. But a symbol cannot be accessed accidentally, the third-party code probably won’t even see it.

Also, imagine that another script wants to have its own identifier inside user, for its own purposes. That may be another JavaScript library, so that the scripts are completely unaware of each other.

```
let id = Symbol("id");
let user = {
  name: "John",
  [id]: 123 // not "id: 123"
};
```

## 11. One-Way Data Flow and Two-Way Data Binding
An application or framework with **one-way data flow** uses the model as the single source of truth.
Messages, sent from a UI in the form of events, are signaling the model to update.
Data is only flowing in one direction: from the model down. The UI input does not have direct access to the model. If we want to update state in response to changes from the UI, the input must send a message carrying the payload. The only way the UI can influence the model is through event that triggers some **setState()** method. The UI will never automagically update the model.

In **two-way data binding**, the data flows in both directions. This means that the JS can update the model and the UI can do so as well.

## 12. Destructuring Assignment
[js.info](https://javascript.info/destructuring-assignment)

Destructuring assignment is a special syntax that allows us to “unpack” arrays or objects into a bunch of variables. Destructuring also works great with complex functions that have a lot of parameters, default values, and so on.

Examples:

- `let [firstName, lastName] = ['John', 'Doe']` // assigns 'John' to firstName and 'Doe' to lastName
- `let [firstName, surname] = 'John Doe'.split(' ')` // same result
- `let [firstName, , title] = ["Julius", "Caesar", "Consul"]` // ignore elements using commas
- `let [one, two, three] = new Set([1, 2, 3])` // works with any iterable
- `let [a, b, c] = "123"` // assumes string as array ["1", "2", "3"]
- `[guest, admin] = [admin, guest]` // swap previously assigned values
- `let {height: newName = 0, width, title} = {title: "Menu", height: 2, width: 1}` // with Objects order doens't matter, newName = 2
- `let width, height; ({width, height} = {width: 9, height: 9})`

Summary:
- destructuring assignment allows for instantly mapping an object or array onto many variables.
- the full object syntax: `let {prop : varName = default, ...rest} = object`
- the full array syntax: `let [item1 = default, item2, ...rest] = array`
- it is possible to extract data from nested arrays/objects, for that the left side must have the same structure as the right one.

## 13. Prototypal Inheritance
If we have a **user** object with its properties and methods, we can make **admin** and **guest** as slightly modified variants of **user**. We’d like to reuse what we have in **user**, not copy/reimplement its methods, just build a new object on top of it. Prototypal inheritance is a language feature that helps in that.

In JavaScript, objects have a special hidden property **\[[Prototype]]**, that is either null or references another object. That object is called “a prototype”.

When we want to read a property from object, and it’s missing, JavaScript automatically takes it from the prototype.

The property **\[[Prototype]]** is internal and hidden, but there are ways to set it. One of them is to use the special name **\_\_proto\_\_**, like this:

```
let animal = { eats: true }; let rabbit = { jumps: true };
rabbit.__proto__ = animal;
```

Note: **\_\_proto\_\_** is an old-fashoned getter/setter for **\[[Prototype]]**. Modern language standard suggests using functions **Object.getPrototypeOf / Object.setPrototypeOf**.

## 14. Class Inheritance
[js.info](https://javascript.info/class-inheritance)

Class inheritance is a way for one class to extend another class. So new functionality can be created on top of the existing.

- `class Child extends Parent` - means Child.prototype.\_\_proto\_\_ = Parent.prototype, so methods are inherited.
- When overriding a constructor, we must call parent constructor as **super()** in Child constructor before using **this**.
- when method is overriden we still can use **super.methodName()** in a Child method to call Parent method.
- methods remember their class/object in the internal **\[[HomeObject]]** property. That’s how **super** resolves parent methods. So it’s not safe to copy a method with **super** from one object to another.
- arrow functions don’t have their own **this** or **super**, so they transparently fit into the surrounding context.

## 15. Promise
[js.info](https://learn.javascript.ru/promise-basics) / [MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise)

The Promise object represents the eventual completion (or failure) of an asynchronous operation, and its resulting value.
Instead of immediately returning the final value, the asynchronous method returns a promise to supply the value at some point in the future.

A Promise has three possible states:
- pending: initial state, neither fulfilled nor rejected
- fulfilled: meaning that the operation completed successfully
- rejected: meaning that the operation failed

When pending **Promise** becomes **fulfilled** or **rejected** the associated handlers queued up by a promise's **then** method are called.
If the promise has already been fulfilled or rejected when a corresponding handler is attached, the handler will be called, so there is no race condition between an asynchronous operation completing and its handlers being attached.

## 16. Equality operators
[MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Equality)

The **abstract equality** operator (\==) compare operands with implicit type coercion, while **strict equality** operator (\===) requires that both operands be of the same type before comparing.

Set of rules:
- comparison of **Objects** will return true only if both operands reference the same object.
- comparison of **Null** and **Undefined** returns **true**.
- when comparing a **Number** and a **String**, the String is converted to a Number value. JavaScript attempts to convert the string numeric literal to a Number type value. First, a mathematical value is derived from the string numeric literal. Next, this value is rounded to nearest Number type value.
- if one of the operands is **Boolean**, the Boolean operand is converted to 1 if it is true and +0 if it is false.
- if an **Object** is compared with a **Number** or **String**, JavaScript attempts to return the default value for the object. Operators attempt to convert the object to a primitive value, a String or Number value, using the valueOf and toString methods of the objects. If this attempt to convert the object fails, a runtime error is generated.
- comparison of two **Number** returns true only if both operands have the same value. +0 and -0 are treated as the same value. If either operand is NaN, return false.
- comparison of two **Boolean** returns true only if operands are both true or both false.

## 17. Errors
[MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Error)

- **TypeErrors** get thrown when a value is not of the expected type, e.g. if try to invoke something that is not a function.
- **SyntaxErrors** get thrown when something isn't valid JavaScript, e.g. when you've written the word "return" as "retrun".
- **ReferenceErrors** get thrown when JavaScript isn't able to find a reference to a value that we are trying to access.
